FuzzBALL is based on, and includes a partial copy of, the Vine library
from the BitBlaze Team at UC Berkeley:

The BitBlaze Team is a research group led by Professor Dawn Song at
University of California, Berkeley, developing technologies for
analyzing program binaries for security applications. The past and
current student and staff members who have contributed to this release
include David Brumley, Juan Caballero, Cody Hartwig, Ivan Jager, Min
Gyung Kang, Zhenkai Liang, Stephen McCamant, James Newsome, Pongsin
Poosankam, Prateek Saxena, Heng Yin, and Jiang Zheng. In particular,
the main contributors to the Vine core component include David
Brumley, Ivan Jager, and Pongsin Poosankam; the main contributors to
the trace, tracecap and trace_utils components for trace recording,
processing and interfacing with the Vine core include Juan Caballero,
Zhenkai Liang, and James Newsome; and Heng Yin is the key developer of
the TEMU component. For more information about BitBlaze, please see
http://bitblaze.cs.berkeley.edu.

FuzzBALL itself was primarily written by Stephen McCamant while he was
a postdoc at UC Berkeley. Other Berkeley contributors included Prateek
Saxena and Devdatta Akhawe, and many other Berkeley colleagues helped
by testing, providing comments, and working on other projects that
included or were derived from it. Portions of the development of
FuzzBALL were also performed by Stephen McCamant for Ensighta
Security, Inc.
